

2003-09-04 - Realized that while PHIX amused me, a more descriptive
name would probably be better. Registered the domains pixtag.com and
picstag.com (the latter for misspellings based on word-of-mouth)

2003-09-03 - Based on some XML discusions with Joe Fritz, made a few
changes to the master file format to make it well formed XML.  Also
based on experience scanning many pictures from the same event,
decided to add the <event> capability.

2003-08-30 - After a long time of contemplation and research on photo
metadata, began work on a photo indexing tools, to be called PHIX for
Photo Index (in the spirit of the STIX STEP Index tools).  Wrote down
my rant against the existing overengineered and incompatible
solutions, developed the initial design points, speced out the file
naming convention, speced out a simple form for the master file, and
began writing a perl script to handle the major operations.

Prior year - Dave shoots many pictures with his digital camera.  Wants
the ability to jot a note on the photo, but annoyed at the inability
of vendors to agree on a standard way to do this.  Also wary of
proprietary solutions since the photos hopefully will be around for
many years.

2002-11-26 - Asked SuperJPG guy to put annotations in EXIF.  Was
rebuffed because he wanted to keep things in his own (closed)
annotation file so that he could support other formats.

January 2003, upgrade to new machine running Windows XP, with the
bundled picture viewer essentially spelling the doom of any other
viewer.  The Windows viewer uses the NTFS properties to support notes.

2003-08-06 - Upgrade from photoshop 3.0, which strips EXIF data, to
photoshop 7.0, which displays EXIF as read only, and only allows notes
as byzantine XMP structures in the JPEG comment block.
